So, a lot of people shrug their
shoulders. So, look at the distance
between my ears and my shoulders. I want
it here. I want to increase the
distance. Arching your back when you're
trying to brace. You're not contracting
those muscles. So, they're not helping
you. A lot of people, they talk about,
should you time your rest period or not?
Well, I think why
not? Okay, last
set. Squat day. Today, we're changing
programs. The emphasis is now on
building my deadlift. That doesn't mean
I take my squats out, but what it does
mean is I'm not trying to push my squats
to like those numbers beyond 300 kg,
which was the goal of my last phase. To
achieve that on my last phase, I brought
back my deadlifts because it's very hard
at that level to bring them both up in
the same week because they interfere
with each other for recovery. So now my
goal is to bring up my deadlift. So my
squat work is to not really max out to
the same degree. So, what I'm going to
do is still squat, but I'm going to
bring in a squat variation that allows
me to still get stronger with my squat.
So, I still work hard, but I bring in a
variation that forces me to reduce the
amount of weight that I lift. So, it's
reducing the total fatigue so that I
have more energy for my deadlift day.
Cut to the chase. That's going to be a
paused squat. So, that's what this phase
is going to be. And I'm still going to
go heavy for a paused squat. So, I'm
thinking that the numbers are going to
be anywhere between kind of 240 to 260,
which is really, really heavy. but it's
different to, you know, 300s, which is
what my last phase ended on. And that's
going to allow me to continue getting
stronger, but then also allow for energy
for a heavier deadlift, which I want to
progress to, you know, 310, 320 later on
in this phase. So, anyway, so today I'm
just warming up. I've done my leg
presses, and now I'm just going through
the pattern. I've got my empty bar here.
I'll probably do one or two sets on the
empty bar and then I'm going to do
triples. I might get to 240 for my first
set of three. This is going to be kind
of like testing week to determine what I
do for the rest of the program. So, I'm
looking at, you know, loosely in the top
of my head like three sets of three on
240 kilograms paused seems like a decent
number and then I'll do some accessories
after that. Why I do the pause? Well,
it's because it's a great stimulus. Like
the fact is a pause squat is a great
squat variation and you know the reason
why I'm doing it now is because it's
forcing me to use less weight. So
automatically it's like 10 to 20%
lighter weight for my paused squat and
it doesn't make it 10 to 20% easier. So
it's equally as hard. I work as hard.
But the fact is the heavier load that
you have on your body and your spine
with these squats and deadlifts, the
more recovery is required. So I can work
as hard without causing the same amount
of systemic fatigue. Okay. So but either
way, let's talk about the pause squat
and why it's so good. Something that I
like to do when I'm approaching my max
singles and and working towards a
competition, which is a possibility, is
making sure that I achieve good depth.
Now, throughout my entire prep, the last
phase when I was going for my heavy
squats, there were certain repetitions
that I looked at, it's like, is that
borderline depth? What is it? So, now
something I like about a paw squat is it
ingrains that bottom position, right?
So, I'm going to watch every single set
and make sure that I'm sitting at the
depth so that I have confidence at that
bottom position so that when I do come
to really testing a max like in
competition, I'm not scared of hitting
that depth even with the heaviest
weight. So, um building up to a strong
paused squat like you know I should be
able to get to 280s 290s pause by the
end of this phase. If I can do that, you
know I'm going to be very very confident
with hitting depth in a competition
squat. So, that's another thing that I
like about it. It's also like for you
guys at home, it doesn't have to be like
I'm talking about numbers, you know, 300
kg and all of these things. It doesn't
have to be, you know, only for for
people that are lifting that much
weight. I love a pore squat for for
introducing someone to to correct
squatting technique. It teaches you how
to maintain whole body tension under
load. Okay. So, for beginners,
intermediate, advanced, I program a pore
squat for pretty much everyone. So
people that lack the ability to maintain
tension in the bottom position of a
squat, pause squat is my favorite
exercise. Maintaining tension in the
bottom of a squat. What the hell is
that? So something I like to say is the
the the way the body behaves in a squat
is kind of like a basketball, right? So
I don't know how fast it should go down
or up, but the speed up should match the
speed down. So, if you're walking down
the street bouncing a basketball, I
don't know how fast the how many meters
per second the basketball should move,
but I can tell if that basketball has
enough air in it or not just by looking
at the way it bounces. So, a human when
they squat, they kind of should look
like a basketball with the right amount
of air in it. So, the speed up should
match the speed down. If it's controlled
or even fast down and it's like a wet
sponge or a flat basketball, that means
you lack the ability to stay tight under
load. How do you improve that? by
spending time in that position with a
pause squat. So, let's go through it
now. Yeah, I'm going to warm up with
pauses the whole way. I'm looking in the
reflection at my depth and I'm feeling
quite tight to be honest with you.
That's but that's just depth. What color
plates should we use today? I think
we'll do blues today. Let's do
that. Bro, guess what? I just took it
off and put on the exact same leg again.
Stupid. I'm not doing that again.
There's no collars.
So, I can feel it. What? That's really
frustrating. All right. So, if you
didn't No, no. I'm not going to do that
again. But I will slide it up further
because it's down too
low. I'm just going to do it. So, I'll
just do one more set here. This was uh
sliding off because I didn't put the
clips on. So, check this out. We'll
probably just go one rep, one rep, one
rep. Now, because I am warm, I've done a
whole bunch of my usual leg presses to
warm up. I did two sets, sorry, three
sets on an empty barbell. Okay. And this
is my second set of 60
kg. Okay, I'm going to go up in 20 kg
increments. So that's 60, 80, 100, 120,
140, 160, 180, 200, so on. So sets of
one. You know, a lot of people say, you
know, if I go up in 20 kilogram
increments, they say, that's so many
sets, aren't you fatigued? And my answer
to that is firstly, you get good at
whatever you train. So I've been
training this way for a long time. And
this is how I do my warm-up sets. So my
body is used to having uh, you know,
more warm-up sets with these incremental
increases. But second to that is I'm
only doing one rep, so that's not very
fatiguing. It's stimulating. So what I
like to do is come to the weight and for
it to feel as light as the weight
before. I don't know if that sounds like
it makes sense to you, but that's what
happens when you do more gradual
incremental increases. You put on a
little bit of weight, your body gets
used to it and then it doesn't actually
feel heavier and you keep on doing that
all the way to the top. So, if I went
from here, like I'm warm, but if I put
100 kg on it now, it would feel like
I've been hit by a truck. But I'm not
going to do that. I keep my all my
equipment on for the whole session. It
just makes it easier.
[Applause]
So my rest periods now um right now
while it's light. So this is 120. My
plan weight for the day is 240. So this
is 50% of my max. How long has my rest
been between these? However long it
takes to put the plate on, readjust,
have a sip of water. Uh, and then I come
back in and do a set. So, that could be,
you know, one anywhere between 1 to
three minutes. I'm not really timing it.
Um, and I'm probably going to do that
maybe up until 180 kg. And then I'm
going to start increasing the rest
period. So, when I get to 180, you know,
200, 220, I'll probably start doing 4
minutes, 5 minutes, 6 minutes. Um, I'd
say 6 minutes will be my my rest between
my last warm-up set and my first work
set. Um, and then in between work sets,
it'll be 6 to 8 minutes. Um, so right
now it's I just put on the plates,
chatted to you guys, so it's been about
2 minutes. So ready to go again.
A lot of people comment about the noises
that you hear on the way down and people
say things like, "I can hear your knees
cracking." I'm pretty sure it's not my
knees. I've got a lot of equipment on.
So, the wrist wraps, the the belt, the
the knee sleeves, and I'm bracing so
hard that my body is so tight and
everything is expanded. I'm pushing out
maximally into my equipment. Um, that
you make
noises. I don't think it's my I'm pretty
sure it's not my knees cracking. They
don't make those sounds. So, if you hear
those little pops and
cracks, I don't know. I don't know. It
doesn't hurt. Um, I'm pretty sure it's
not my joints
cracking, but that's kind of what you
get when you have no music when you're
doing these heavy
weights. Yeah. So, it's quite
interesting. That's the ASMR of
training. Anyway, that's what it is. I'm
going to give you some tips that I use
uh for the cues for my squats. So, when
it comes to queuing, I don't like to
overwhelm you with a shopping list of
different cues. It's hard to focus on so
many things at once. So, whenever I'm
coaching somebody, we work on kind of
like one, maybe two cues at a
time. So, that's what you don't want
when you're coming in is like so many
things to think about. That's where it
becomes overwhelming. But what I am
going to talk to you about is one or two
tips at a time. So firstly, something
you may have seen is my grip position.
So every set warming up, look at my my
shoulders are super tight. A lot of
people ask me, um, why are you holding
it so wide? Aren't you supposed to hold
it close? My rule is to hold the bar as
close as your shoulder mobility allows.
This is as much like I I can't get under
when the hands are a bit closer. Not
yet. I have to wait till my hands my
shoulders are a little bit warmer. So my
first set I was here. My last set I was
kind of like three fingers, you know,
collar to collar. So, when you do three,
that's called a talon grip. Uh, it's a
pretty cool tip for people that have
like some type of shoulder tightness or
bicep pain or whatever it is in
discomfort. Three fingers, it allows you
to position your wrists so you're on a
nicer angle. When I do four fingers, I
have to change my wrist angle on the
barbell, which can increase the tension
on my
shoulders. So, increased tension on
shoulders. So, listen to those words. I
want increased tension, especially for
my top sets. I want to be as tight as
possible. But right now that I'm not as
warm and and I'm getting more and more
mobile each set, I can't afford to have
that much tension. So, three-finger
talon grip is a great alternative if you
experience shoulder discomfort. So,
that's where we're at now. So, here's
the here's the cue that sounds funny.
Hold the bar as close as your shoulder
mobility allows. So, for most people,
you know, their hands are kind of like
hereish. For me, I got really tight
shoulders anyway. So that's as close as
it allows for me. Now the reason why we
want to hold the bar close is it allows
us to squeeze our shoulders together.
That action there where we squeeze our
shoulders together engages those midback
muscles which is romboids and traps. So
the muscles that are in between my
shoulder blades to squeeze those
together. When I squeeze those together,
it stops me from being able to fold in
half. So I don't want to fold in half. I
want a rigid upper back. So that's how
we initiate upper back tension is close
grip. So for me, this is close grip.
It's relative to you. So this is my
close grip. For you, it'll be a lot
closer than that. Now I place this on my
rear delts. Okay. Now here, elbows back
and down. So I don't shrug. So a lot of
people shrug their shoulders. So look at
the distance between my ears and my
shoulders. I want it here. I want to
increase the distance. So if you're
shrugging, that's what people do to hold
the bar in place to create the shelf.
They they go like this because they're
scared the bar is going to roll off. If
you do that, you're doing it wrong. We
want to create the shelf by pulling the
elbows back and down. So that's rear
delts, but then I want I do want it
down. Increase the distance between your
ears and your shoulders. And that's the
strong position. You ready? So elbows
back and down. So don't do one without
the other. Don't just do elbows down
because then you got no midback tension.
And don't just do elbows back because
then the down component is lat tension.
So we want a combination of back and
down. And this is how it looks.
Okay, so that's upper back tension. Now,
we're going to talk about So, a lot of
people ask the question, how do you
brace in a squat? And this is me trying
to explain that a brace isn't just
limited to what you're doing with your
abs and your breath hold. Upper back
brace is a thing. So is your lower body
brace. I don't just stand passively with
my legs here. I stand actively. So my
legs, my lower body is engaged from the
moment I unrackck it. And what I like to
do is stand in my comfortable stance,
which is going to be different to
everybody. Here's one that you can use
straight away is feet just outside of
hipwidth, toes pointed very slightly
outwards. So that's a a great start
point that you can consider. For me,
I've been doing it for a while and I've
developed strength for my low bar squat
in a slightly wider stance. If you're
unfamiliar with this and you try it from
day one, you'll feel uncomfortable.
You've got to build strength with a
slightly wider and wider stance. It
takes time, but for me, that's where I'm
standing. Now, when I stand, I'm
thinking about gripping the floor with
my feet, grabbing on and screwing my
feet, so externally rotating my feet
into the ground. So, when you do that,
the knees, it kind of points the knees
slightly outwards. And it also engages
my butt muscles. So I'm standing with
all of my muscles supporting that
weight, but I'm also stacked. What does
stacked mean? Foot in line with knee in
line with hip. Stacked. So I'm not like
my knees aren't caving in. Okay, that's
a kink in the armor. So open hips. Now
when I'm screwing my feet into the floor
like this, the first when I initiate the
movement, the knees want to kind of like
they don't kind of just knock in. When
I'm screwing my feet like externally, it
opens the hips. Why do I want open hips?
That's going to allow me to be able to
achieve a better bottom position with my
pelvis. When the knees come in, it
forces my butt to come back further.
I've got no room for my pelvis to
achieve that bottom position. So,
screwing the feet into the floor and
think about open hips, knees in the same
direction as the toes on my way down.
Uh, and I don't really think about it on
the way up, but it kind of just I've
just done it for so long that they just
stay in line. Some people's knees knock
in and all that. I think you should work
towards that not happening because
that's a leakage that's no longer
stacked. So, if you can focus on
maintaining that alignment from start to
finish like this. So, upper back cues
remain the same, but now we're going to
focus on lower body tension.
Standing in my stance, I'm screwing my
feet into the floor. My lower body is
active. Big
breath. So that's upper body
brace, lower body kind of like start
position. Next, we're going to talk
about core brace. All right. So, what do
we do with our core? I'm using a belt.
Now, something that's cool about a belt
is it gives me kinesthetic
feedback. So, it teaches my body to
press against the things that are
touching it. So, the belt is wrapping
around 360° around my core. I want to
expand my entire torso into that belt.
So, not just the abs. I want to push my
back into the belt. I want to expand the
entire ribs, the entire midsection. So,
that's how I breathe. I expand my belly.
Right. The next thing I want you to
think about is imagine I'm going to
punch you in the guts. Right? How do you
want to brace your abs to protect
yourself so that it doesn't hurt you?
Right? What a lot of people do in their
squat incorrectly is they arch back
excessively so that they can protect
themselves from not folding forward. So
they use all these muscles to arch that
way. The problem with that is is a few
things. One, it changes the pelvis
position. Two, it's called anterior
tilt. I don't want anterior tilt. We
lose range of motion in depth. When we
anterly tilt, watch this. Come down and
then you go into buttwink, right? So,
the way that I want to position my
pelvis is neutral. So, when I come down,
it allows a greater range of motion. The
next thing is bracing my abs. If you
understand how muscles work, they grab
the attachment points and pull those two
points together. So the attachment
points is the bottom of the ribs and the
top of the pelvis. That's where the
six-pack muscles are. When they
contract, it brings those two points
together. So therefore, if you're ar if
you're arching your back when you're
trying to brace, you're not contracting
those muscles. So they're not helping
you. So how do you contract those
muscles? Imagine you're getting punched.
That's how you brace. So you might hear
people say the cues ribs down, but
that's typically why we want our ribs
down rather than ribs flared. So ribs
flared is not contracting six-pack
muscles properly and you're anterly
rotating your pelvis. So ribs down,
six-pack abs, push into the belt and
neutral pelvis. Okay, so I'm going to do
that on the next set.
Okay. So, if you notice, I'm not going
to talk while I'm unrackcking cuz it
feels heavier when I do that. So, I'll
do all the talking before and after the
set. So, next up is 200
kg. So, I've shown you upper back
tension, shown you how I position my
feet, and how I've got active feet. I'm
screw I'm gripping onto the floor and
screwing them into the floor. External
rotation which engages my hip muscles
and then I brace by expanding into the
belt and ribs down. So that's why I do
ribs down. It's not just because I want
to push my ribs down. It's because I
want to contract my rectus abdominis.
And those muscles, they pull the ribs
down and the pelvis into a neutral
position. Next
up, where am I looking when I squat? Now
this is something that I learned from my
mentors, one of my mentors, Ernie
Liybridge senior and his son Eric
Liybridge. These guys are the best in
the world. Eric Liybridge squatted 480
kg in the 140
class. Unreal, right? And they had a
rule with their squats and that's to
look straight ahead. So I was always of
the belief that you should look down to
maintain a neutral spine type of thing
because there's going to be forward
torso lean. But the way they introduced
it to me was the body follows the eyes.
So when you look down, a lot of the
times that's where you see people
failing downwards because this is a
balance and a proprioception thing.
Whereas when you're looking up, it
allows you. So there's a difference with
squatting like double so body weight
squats and a little bit more which is
what the average person squats to what
these guys are doing. You know, triple
body weightight squats and more. You
have to balance this really heavy thing
on your back. And when you're looking
down and you're intentionally tipping
forward, uh, it just makes it a lot
harder for yourself. So looking up
allows for better balance. Now, a lot of
people, it's quite confusing because a
lot of people say you shouldn't be
upright in a squat. And then you got
other people saying you should be
upright in a squat. I'll tell you the
truth. The goal is upright, but you
shouldn't be upright, right? You don't
want to be tipping forward. So you don't
want to say stay neutral, right? You
want to say, you know, resist that heavy
weight that's trying to crush your body.
So if you hear the cues upright, you
know, upright relative to the body
position. Technically, there is always
going to be forward torso lean. Of
course there is. So I don't expect, you
know, and I don't think anyone expects
for you to have a completely vertical
torso for a big low bar squat, right?
But when you look up, it's in aid of
balance and helping you not tip forward
when you squat. And I quite like that.
Um, it's not a deal breaker if that's
not you. I've seen some highle squatters
that don't do that and it's totally
fine. But as a general rule, I think
that that would suit, you know, 90% of
people out there is to pick a spot
exactly in front of you. That doesn't
mean look up, okay? It means pick a spot
directly in front of
you and focus on that with just your
whole face. So, don't look down and have
your eyes up like that with your whole
face. Bang. Um, you know, if you want
proof of that, you should go and watch
any of the world record squats and watch
what they
do. Most of the world record squats, the
biggest squats in all weight classes,
the face is there at least in the bottom
position is here.
Bang. And that's what I'm trying to do
now.
One more warmup
set which is uh 220. You know what's
funny? This is my first week of the
program. If you guys know much about my
programming style, I like to teach
people to start week one with
conservative
loads, right? So, you're starting kind
of light and allowing room to be able to
progress from week to week. So, the
funny thing is I'm starting light. It's
supposed to be light,
but it's never light really. Do you know
what I mean? Like for me, 240 for three,
like on
paper, that's 80% of my max for triples.
That should be I don't call it light,
but that should be like very achievable,
but it's still damn hard. Anyway, so
whenever I say start light, I don't mean
your training should be easy. What I
mean is you should finish the set and
you could have done an extra rep or two
for
sure, but it doesn't mean it's easy. And
I'll tell you now,
It's not feeling that easy. So, that was
200. And I'm not recording myself yet,
but I'm going to on the next one so that
I can play it back. Um, you know, and it
should be easy. And I bet you if I
looked at it, you'd look at it and say,
"Oh, yeah, it looked pretty easy." But
still working
hard. Last warm up.
[Applause]
I'll tell you why I'm laughing. Cuz you
probably saw my face went
I was just looking at it going how
dramatic like it it moved pretty well
and look on the faces as if that guy is
having a hard time. Settle down big
fella. Do you know what I mean?
So here's a tip for recording yourself.
I mean um monitoring how much rest you
have in between sets without getting
your timer out. That was taken at 1217.
So now I'm going to measure uh so about
six minutes from there. So that's going
to be 23 24 something like that is going
to be my next set. What's the time now?
It's 21. So I'll give myself two more
minutes. That's how I time my rest. Do
you know what I mean? So a lot of people
they talk about should you time your
rest period or not? Well, I think why
not? Why not? You know people say just
go when you're ready. And I'll tell you
something funny. Sometimes if I write a
program for somebody and it could be
like 3x3 for example what we're going to
do today and they do something like 32
like they miss a rep. One of the
questions I'm going to ask is, "How many
minutes did you rest between
sets?" Quite often they'll say, "Oh, you
know, I rested a long time." Yeah, cool.
How long it was the time period that you
wrote on the program?
Cool. Did you time that? No. Okay. Time
it. You know what I mean? [__] time
it. Because a lot of the times, and I'm
I'm a culprit of this as well, is I
think, "Yeah, six minutes. Damn, that's
a long time. Like, it's been six
minutes." and I'll go and do it and I'll
look back on the clock and it's like,
"Okay, that was four minutes." You know,
I mistimed that time period. Um, I
promise you 6 minutes allows better rest
than four minutes. Even if you feel like
you're ready to go at 4 minutes, okay?
So, sometimes if you come to me and you
say, you know, I did 332, like I missed
the last rep on the last set, I'll say,
"How long was your rest?" And you might
come back to me and say, "Five minutes."
And I'll say to you, next session do
like increase the rest by an extra
minute or even two minutes. I don't want
you to go lighter the next week so you
can get all reps and sets. Right? So
that's something that I look for. That's
when it comes to strength training.
Strength training quality matters and
how much weight you lift
matters. I want you to get all the
weight that I
prescribe.
So timing the rest period like people
make it out as if oh it's so hard to do
and you're being so you're being too
particular and all this. No, you're not.
All I'm doing is sitting down. I checked
the time that I recorded which was 17.
It's 22 past now. So, it's been five
minutes. So, it's about to be six
minutes and then we're ready to go. Was
that so hard? Didn't think so. All
right. This is work set number one. So,
I need to switch on because actually
it's pretty hard. Nah, because every
time I see the YouTube video and there's
music on, we have to mute it. So, for
those wondering at home, uh if we don't
mute it, uh YouTube will turn it off or
whatever they do. So,
I do that when it's like really serious
time and I need the music. But right now
it is
serious. We'll do it in silence.
That was
hard. Hard. But I had a rep in reserve.
Maybe even two if I had
to. But I'm not going to lie, it was
hard. You know what sucks? I got to do
it
again. All right, let's go. Set two.
Wow. Wow.
Okay, it's
tough, but it wasn't really harder than
the first set. You know,
easier really
maybe. You know, I'll tell you
why. Let's be real. I think my last
pause was a bit quick. Whatever.
Let's
see. Fine. It's fine. It's
fine. Maybe it did look easier.
I felt like it was like a better bar
position and a better body
position. Not
intentionally. Like my internal queuing
I feel like was a little bit different.
Like you know what I just said about
being upright. I was fighting on being
more upright. So when you do a low bar
squat, it wants to tip you forward
further and
further, you know, and sometimes queuing
is different for every person depending
on what they're trying to achieve,
right? But my torso is going to tip
forward, but within those parameters, I
want to be as upright as I can, right?
So I don't want to just accept it's
coming forward, so no problem. Let it
come forward. I want to be as upright as
I I
can. The more upright you are, the more
quads you can use. So, they're like such
minute little movements that you may or
may not see, but I feel it. So, how do I
be more upright? Push the knees further
forward. They might come forward. I
don't know how long how far. Maybe you
can't even tell the difference, but I
definitely felt it. I felt like I was
trying to use my quads better by pushing
my knees slightly further forward, which
allows me to be slightly more upright.
We could be talking millimeters, but I
felt it was a nicer
position, you know, and it'll be
interesting to get all three of those
sets side by side and have a look to see
was there a difference. You probably see
not much. That's okay. That's a good
thing, right? Because I'm not
accumulating fatigue, right? So, the
first set as good as the second set, as
good as the third set. So that'll tell
me that'll give me confidence to come in
next week and go slightly better than
that. So how do I go slightly better
than
that? Do I do 250 for
doubles? Do I do
245 for 3x3? Maybe. I don't like 250 for
doubles because then what does that
mean? 260 for singles. I can do 260 for
singles now. I don't want 260 for one. I
want
maybe No, I don't want 260 for one.
Like I should be able to do 280 for one.
No, 270 for one. I'd say I'd say your
paw squat it should be 10% less than
your max squat. So therefore 10% of 300
is 30 kg. My paw squat I should be at
about 270
paused. But I think I can do that. Of
course I can. So why would I want a 260?
Well, the idea is to not go to fail. I'm
not maxing out, right? I'm stimulating,
you know,
strength improvements and, you know,
hopefully a little bit of muscle gain.
Um, but you don't have to go to your
absolute limit to be able to achieve
that. And by not going to my absolute
limits today, allows more energy for a
successful deadlift
session, which is going to be this
weekend before my seminar, which will be
a tough one. So, 31 12:31 was the time
of that set. I'm going to go at 12:39.
So, we're doing now. We're doing eight
minute rest between these sets. I need
eight
minutes. Okay, last
set. Let's make it the best set. Must
you ready? Let's make it the best set.
[Applause]
Oh man.
I feel like that was a little bit
slower. That was probably my slowest
set,
but it's pretty
good. Guess what? No more squats today.
No more squats today.
That's a nice feeling, you know, where
the hard stuff is done. Anyhow, so let's
go back to some programming principles.
Have you guys been paying attention? So
the first exercise of the day is the
highest relevance to achieving your
goal. So for me, I want a big
powerlifting squat. So powerlifting
squat. Secondary exercise of the day is
whatever you've neglected in the main
movement, right?
So, you know, in the same pattern, of
course. So, that's squat day. So, what
are the muscles that I'm neglected with
my low bar squat? Let's think about it.
That's a hip dominant squat pattern.
There's a lot of hip bend, but there's
not a hell of a lot of knee bend. So, if
that's how you squat and that's the only
way that you squat and you want to build
big legs, you're probably not going to
have big legs. That's not how you really
hit your quadricep muscles. That's hip
extensors, which is a great group of
muscles to strengthen. So that's
adductors, glutes, a lot of back for
sure. Not a huge amount of hamstrings
and yes, a little bit of quads, but not
a huge amount of quads. So my secondary
exercise, I'm going to factor in what I
neglected in the main movement. That was
a lot of hip bend. Next exercise, I'm
going to do a lot of knee bend. So my
favorite knee bend squat pattern. I've
been doing it a lot. I'm going to keep
doing it, but not this session. But
that's the stiletto
squat. For now, I don't want to do a
stiletto squat. I'm smashed. I'm gonna
save that for my deadlift day. For now,
I'm going to do leg press. Quad
dominant. Come and check it out.
You thought I was going to do more
stiletto squats. That's so brutal.
Imagine that. Great. No more squats. But
guess what? My secondary is more squats.
No, that I have done it plenty of times,
but not when I do like I've done it when
I do like one top set. So, if I did a
top set of three, then it would make
sense to go let's do back downs on some
stiletto squats. But I did three big
sets. No more squats. So, next up, we do
leg press. My soul, my soul, bro. My
soul. Don't worry about your soul. I'll
show you what I mean by quad dominant
leg press. So typical leg press is like
more hip dominant around here. Like you
know that's
a typical leg press. Great exercise, but
I've just done I've just done a hip
dominant squat pattern. So why do more
hip dominant work? That's called
exercise redundancy. It's hitting the
same muscles as I just hit. So I go
from, you know, like higher and wide to
narrow and close. Very much what I would
do in my stiletto squat. And I allow my
heels to lift so that I can press my
hamstring against my calf in that bottom
position. So that's allowing for full
knee bend. So the hamstring presses
against the calf. So that allows me to
strengthen my quadricep through its full
lengthened position. Remember, I'm not
warming up. I'm doing feel sets, right?
How many feel sets should I do? I don't
know. I'll probably work to about five
plates aside. So, I'll just
gradually increase, gradually go up.
Right. Where are our plates? This is the
sucky
part. So, I'll probably do two high rep
sets. So my sets will probably be, you
know, 15 to 20 rep range. Um, which is a
strange combination. So there's the idea
of building strength. So that's lower
reps, heavy weight, and then building
muscle. Higher reps and lighter loads
build muscle. And you know, there's a
few thoughts that people like to do like
power building, which is where you do
powerlifting movements, but then
bodybuilding at the end of a session.
That's not really what I'm trying to do.
I guess I'm trying to build muscle and
build strength. But what I factor in as
a higher priority is choosing the most
logical rep range for each particular
exercise. Right? So this has a much
lower technical complexity. Right? So
I'm laying in a bench and just going up
and down. So the technical breakdown,
there's going to be no technical
breakdown compared to a squat. Very
technical. You shouldn't do high reps
with very technical movements. So what's
the most technical? Snatch, clean, and
jerk. The movements that you see in the
Olympics. And you do not see those
people doing high reps. They're
typically doing, you know, one to three
rep range. So for me, you know, as a
strength session, what's a good strength
rep range? You know, four to six reps. I
don't like leg press with four to six
reps. Do you know how it feels for my
brain when I go super heavy? Like for me
to do four to six reps, I don't know how
many plates I'd put on. Heaps. And the
feeling of that, like the blood pressure
build up in my head, I just would hate
it. So for me, that's why for a leg
press, I just don't like super super
heavy with low reps. It just doesn't
suit the exercise. It doesn't make me
feel good. So that's why for my leg
press, I typically like to do higher
reps. So that's what I'm going for. 15
to 20ish reps. That's what we're doing
here. What was that for? Hey, to be on
your show. Ah, I thought she was
congratulating me for my squat. Is that
what you're doing? That was exactly what
I was doing. Thank you. I've got a
really good support
team. All right. Maybe you can high five
after this set.
Okay. Didn't need to go 15 reps on that.
I'm just feeling the
weight. Okay, last warm up.
Okay, thanks.
[Music]
Oh man.
No, that was
15. You know, I swear, man. I know. I
know I'll look back at the video and say
there was more in the
tank, but man, that's [__]
hard. Yeah. So, that's hip dominant
squat with a low bar squat. Quad
dominant. So, um quad dominant secondary
exercise. That's my leg press. If you've
been watching, you'll know this, but if
not, welcome to the show and I'm going
to teach you more about this. So,
basically, we did not hit all of our
quadricep muscles, even though I've done
a, you know, two really big quad
exercises. one of the heads of the
quadriceps. So there's four. One of the
heads doesn't get much tension during
squat patterns. It's called the rectus
forous and that's because it crosses two
joints. The other quadriceps, so vasis
mediialis, vasis intermediious, vasis
lateralis, they're only responsible for
knee joint extension. So they only cross
the knee joint. But because the rectus
crosses the hip joint, the squat pattern
causes two conflicting actions. So what
do I mean by that? When I bend the knee
to come down, it stretches the quad at
the knee, but also I'm bending my hips
as well or flexing my hip joint. So,
it's stretching it at the knee, but
shortening it at the hip. So, and then
when I stand up, it shortens at the knee
and lengthens at my hip. Do you get it?
So, the length of the quadricep remains
the same from start to finish. Sorry,
the length of the rectus for Morris. So,
it's not that it's not on, just not on
to the same degree. So therefore, if all
I do is squats and leg presses and, you
know, lunges or squat patterns like
that, compound movements, we're
neglecting the rectus forous. So how do
we make up for that? We isolate it. So
this is where I'll always recommend
adding in some leg extensions. So that's
what I'm going to do
now. I don't need my knee sleeves for
that. Oh
man. Now, these are very annoying to get
off, but let's see if we can do it. I'm
relying on my sweat. Okay,
so this is how I can get off my Yeah,
it's okay because I'm very
sweaty. Yeah, good one. See that? At the
start of the session, I had to swap
legs. I'll show you what I'm talking
about. Can you zoom in on that? See the
split that digs into the back of my leg.
I don't know if you can see it. Well, my
legs are more
conditioned. So, that cuts that cuts the
leg
and it's very uncomfortable. Anyway,
good. That's that. So, leg extension.
Here's some recommendations with the leg
extension. See that? I've just sat the
seat back a little bit. So, when you sit
the seat back, if you're sitting
upright, it's fine. like it hits the
quadriceps, right? But when I sit back,
when I lean back, it creates a stretch
at that specific muscle that I'm
referring to that I don't want to
neglect. Now, that's the rectus forous.
So, leaning back gives you a slight
advantage. It creates more tension on
that muscle and allows better muscle
building. So, that's uh I'll probably do
three sets of 12 to 15. That's a feel
set. So, that's the first one just to
feel the weight. And then, you know what
else I'm going to do? No, you don't need
carbs to be a powerlifter. We've
established this. And for those that
disagree, go and have a look at Colton,
the limit breaker, and John Hack. Go and
have a look at their calves. They're not
very big, but they are very strong,
stronger than everyone else in the
world. So, this is what I'm going to do.
I'm going to alternate between a leg
extension and a leg curl. It's kind of
just like a free opportunity to get more
hamstring volume, right? So, typically
I'd do my hamstrings on my uh my
deadlift day. So, that's posterior chain
day. But this is like instead of just
sitting there and waiting, you know, 5
minutes between leg extension sets, I'll
wait 2 minutes and do hammy curls and
add some more volume. So sometimes it's
not a matter of more volume is better,
right? Because sometimes if you just do
more and more work of like those big
squats and big exercises, you're not
able to recover from it. But these
exercises are so easy to recover from.
It's just a great chance to get a little
bit more volume on those muscles and
build some extra hamstrings while we're
resting for
quadriceps. This is a feel set. I don't
really need to do too many. I'll do one
feel set and then we'll go straight to
the top sets. We'll do 12 reps on each.
Yeah. So, I'm going to do 3x 12 on a leg
extension. Alternate that with a
hamstring curl. And that is your perfect
leg day. Now, here's the thing. I say
it's your perfect leg day. For me, I'm a
powerlifter. My goal is to get a really
big squat. Other people might have
different goals in squat for different
reasons such as glute development.
Right? So, if you want a perfect glute
day, uh you could go don't worry about
the leg press and instead of the leg
press, do something like a hip thruster.
So, for the chicks out there, some guys
like to prioritize glutes, but not as
much. I think some guys should. Um, but
either way, squats, great exercise for
glutes. Same with deadlifts and all
these things, but not as targeted as
something like a hip thrust. So, if I
was to focus on not squats and not quads
to get a perfect lower body day, I'd
probably go squats, pair that with a hip
thrust, and then pair that with a leg
extension, hamstring curl. That's
another great alternative for a perfect
lower body day. But anyway, I am a
squatter and I choose that one instead.
Anyway, so that's my session. I hope you
liked it. Um, we will be back later on
this week. You know, we will. Um, we've
got bench press. This week is a shorter
week. I've only got three days of
sessions because last week I was away
from Melbourne for seminars. This
weekend I've got Sydney seminars. Um,
and I got to sneak in my lower body
session before that. So, that's going to
be a tough one. But either way, you're
going to see that's my deadlift day. Um,
and I'm going to see you guys then. Have
a good week, everyone. Program set in
stone then? You could say it's set in
stone. None none of my programs are
really set in stone. So, loosely I'm
probably going to keep that like 3x3
paws on a low bar squat. Um, sometimes I
might uh feel a little bit spicy and go
heavier. But yeah, realistically 3x3
pause squats. Pair that with two sets of
15 leg press and then the these ones
here. And then on my other day is going
to be deadlift day with stiletto squats.
So my deadlifts, I'm thinking of just
keeping on doing singles. So low
percentage of your max singles. So last
week I did 2x1 and 270. I'm thinking of
just adding 10 kilos every week. So this
week I go two by one and 280 followed by
my stiletto squats. That's a good
session.